Your Brain And Information Overload
Of course, because these short-form videos are a form of social media, it’s likely that they come with all of the other issues social media has been linked to. And although research is still emerging on exactly how the short videos fit into the picture and whether they’re better or worse for our mental health than other forms of social media, research has shown that “TikTok use disorder” is linked to memory loss, as well as depression, anxiety, and stress.
Social shorts could also mess with the brain by taking a toll on your attention span. We flit so quickly between videos, scrolling when someone speaks just a bit too slowly to capture our interest, and this could potentially make our focus worse than it already is.
There isn’t any research that has specifically pegged short-form videos to decreased attention span. However, one 2019 study found that when society is faced with an overabundance of information, our collective attention span decreases. On Twitter, for example, viral hashtags used to stay in the top 50 for an average of 17.5 hours in 2013. But as more and more content has become quickly available on the internet, that average dropped to 11.9 hours in 2016. And with it being so easy to scroll through tens if not hundreds of TikToks in one sitting, short videos certainly meet the description of overloading our brains with information.
Social shorts may have particularly negative effects on kids and teens, whose brains are still developing. Children usually have a harder time using directed attention than adults — tuning out distractions and sustaining attention to do something like read a book. And TikTok may make kids’ directed attention worse. “If kids’ brains become accustomed to constant changes, the brain finds it difficult to adapt to a non-digital activity where things don’t move quite as fast,” Michael Manos, Ph.D., clinical director of the Center for Attention and Learning at Cleveland Clinic Children’s, told the Wall Street Journal.
