The Dopamine Problem
It’s not uncommon for people to comment on TikTok videos of cute babies or puppies saying that their serotonin is spiking. But serotonin isn’t the only neurotransmitter at play here. Enter dopamine, a neurotransmitter that’s highly involved in the brain’s reward system and, you guessed it, addiction. And, yes, research has found that dopamine is involved in those reward centers that light up when people watch personalized TikTok videos.
But after watching these videos, you enter a dopamine deficit. “The problem with things that release a lot of dopamine all at once is that our brains have to compensate,” Dr. Anna Lembke, M.D., a psychiatrist and chief of the Addiction Medicine Dual Diagnosis Clinic at Stanford University, told Teen Vogue. “It actually pushes dopamine levels below baseline. We go into a dopamine deficit state. That’s the way the brain restores homeostasis: If there’s a huge deviation upward, then there’s going to be a deviation downward. That’s essentially the comedown…that moment of wanting to stay online and click on one more video or connect with one more person.” And when in a dopamine deficit, people can experience symptoms of depression and anxiety.
Dopamine hits from internet use can have a big impact on kids particularly, Fatherly previously reported. It impairs their impulse control and increases their demand for instant gratification. “Screen time leads to dopamine release. This means that the more screen time, the more addicted to screen time your child will become,” family therapist Katie Ziskind told Fatherly.
To cut back on short-form videos and other forms of social media, some experts recommend dopamine fasting. Rather than entirely cutting them out of your life, try restricting your social media use to a certain period of time during the day. You won’t actually be “fasting” from dopamine, but it will help you control the impulsive behaviors that reinforce constantly reaching for your phone. When you feel like opening up TikTok, do something else like read a page of a book instead to condition yourself against giving into that urge. Or, rather than relying on willpower, you can download an app that stops you from using social media apps after reaching your daily time limit.

4. It Can Harm Self-Esteem 
 
This goes hand-in-hand with the previous point. A large volume of negative comments, or even a single one, can have a devastating impact on a kid’s self-esteem. TikTok, and other social networks, such as Instagram and Facebook, have been criticized for having negative effects on one’s confidence. This can deeply hurt one’s mental health. There have been instances where kids turned to self-harm or faced other issues, such as anorexia and bulimia, because of social media.